Add LLM model server metrics (#1103)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/gen-ai/gen-ai-metrics.md

linkTitle: Generative AI metrics
--->

# Semantic Conventions for Generative AI Metrics

**Status**: [Experimental][DocumentStatus]

<!-- Re-generate TOC with `markdown-toc --no-first-h1 -i` -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Generative AI Client Metrics](#generative-ai-client-metrics)
  - [Metric: `gen_ai.client.token.usage`](#metric-gen_aiclienttokenusage)
  - [Metric: `gen_ai.client.operation.duration`](#metric-gen_aiclientoperationduration)

> - [Generative AI Model Server Metrics](#generative-ai-model-server-metrics)

Reviewer: > non-blocking: I think eventually we should have client and server in different files (we keep HTTP metrics in one file, so this PR uses existing practice).
> 
> Adding a comment to gather more feedback. Either way, it's a cosmetic change that can be done later.

I agree we can keep it one for now and separate later.

>   - [Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.request_duration`](#metric-gen_aiserverlatencyrequest_duration)

Reviewer 2: Having `latency` and `duration` in the same metric name sounds confusing. 

I'd prefer `gen_ai.server.request.duration` - we already have time-to-first-token in `gen_ai.server.latency.time_to_first_token`, so we need time-to-last token. 

We can introduce a symmetrical `gen_ai.client.time_to_first_token`

Author: Makes sense. Updated.

>   - [Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token`](#metric-gen_aiserverlatencytime_per_output_token)

Reviewer 2: similarly to `gen_ai.server.time_to_first_token`, why not `gen_ai.server.time_per_token`? 
Also if do `time_per_output_token`, we should probably do `time_to_first_output_token`

Author: Time to first token (TTFT) and time per output token (TPOT) are widely used terminologies as you can see from the best practices guides and usage across companies and organizations - [Databricks](https://www.databricks.com/blog/llm-inference-performance-engineering-best-practices), [Microsoft](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/databricks/machine-learning/foundation-models/prov-throughput-run-benchmark#--llm-inference-introduction), [ MLCommons ](https://mlcommons.org/2024/03/mlperf-llama2-70b/) and [vLLM](https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/828da0d44e9124d949909477d6018fc08469a31e/vllm/engine/metrics.py#L77). So, I'd like to keep them as is.

>   - [Metric: `gen_ai.server.time_to_first_token`](#metric-gen_aiservertime_to_first_token)

Reviewer 3: Can you please take a look at https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/blob/main/vllm/tracing.py#L88-L94 , this is for server observability with vLLM, it has request id, best_of, time_in_queue etc, do you want to add those metrics as well?

Reviewer 3: This was introduced by https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm/pull/4687/

Author: Yes, we can add those as well. But I'd do it in a separate change. Do you want to raise a PR for the tracing attributes?

Reviewer 3: Yes, I can do that, thanks @achandrasekar

>   - [Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.time_to_first_token`](#metric-gen_aiserverlatencytime_to_first_token)

Reviewer 2: why not `gen_ai.server.time_to_first_token` ? `latency` seems redundant

Author: The reason to add latency is to group model server metrics into different categories like `latency`, `capacity`, `admission`, etc. But I'm okay with not having the grouping. I've updated the names.

support serving LLMs.

For example, if a model server which serves LLMs reports latency information,
it SHOULD be used.

If instrumentation cannot obtain this information at a request level and break
it down into the buckets mentioned below, then it MUST NOT report this metric.

This metric SHOULD be specified with [ExplicitBucketBoundaries] of
[0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 2.5].

<!-- semconv metric.gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token(metric_table) -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    | Stability |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- |
| `gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token` | Histogram | `s` | Mean time per output token generated | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

> ### Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token`

Reviewer 4: same metric name as before?

Reviewer 4: copy/paste error?

Author: Yes, good catch. Fixed it.

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Generative AI Model Server Metrics

> The following metric instruments describe Generative AI model servers'

Reviewer 2: can we please render attribute table for each metric? (Or if all attributes are the same, could we render them here just once?)

Author: Added

operational metrics. It includes both functional and performance metrics.

### Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.request_duration`

This metric is [recommended][MetricRecommended] to report the model server
latency in terms of time spent per request.

For example, if a GenAI model server reports latency information, it SHOULD be
used.

If instrumentation cannot obtain this information at a request level and break
it down into the buckets mentioned below, then it MUST NOT report this metric.

This metric SHOULD be specified with [ExplicitBucketBoundaries] of

> [1.0, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, 15.0, 20.0, 30.0, 40.0, 50.0, 60.0].

Reviewer 2: this one does not seem to be exponential.

Can we reuse the same boundaries as for the client one? If you'd rather change them, let's do it consistently too - I assume there is no reason to expect drastically different time-to-last-token between client and server in case of LLM request.

(I agree lower boundaries are not so helpful for LLM, but there could still be simple operations such as list models or error responses that are in ms range)

Author: Makes sense. Made it the same as client buckets.

<!-- semconv metric.gen_ai.server.latency.request_duration(metric_table) -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    | Stability |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- |

> | `gen_ai.server.latency.request_duration` | Histogram | `s` | Time (end to end latency) to complete a request | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: maybe 
```suggestion
| `gen_ai.server.latency.request_duration` | Histogram | `s` | Generative AI server request duration such as time-to-last byte or last output token | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token`

This metric is [recommended][MetricRecommended] to report the model server
latency in terms of time per token generated for any model servers which
support serving LLMs.

For example, if a model server which serves LLMs reports latency information,
it SHOULD be used.

If instrumentation cannot obtain this information at a request level and break
it down into the buckets mentioned below, then it MUST NOT report this metric.

This metric SHOULD be specified with [ExplicitBucketBoundaries] of
[0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.15, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 2.5].

<!-- semconv metric.gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token(metric_table) -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    | Stability |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- |

> | `gen_ai.server.latency.time_per_output_token` | Histogram | `s` | Time per output token generated for successful responses | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: Can we provide a more strict definition (either in the brief or in the note above)?

Does it capture the time difference between two generate token for all tokens except the first one?
Should it be reported for streaming requests only or for all requests?

Author: Updated the brief to clarify it and added a better description.

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `gen_ai.server.latency.time_to_first_token`

This metric is [recommended][MetricRecommended] to report the model server

> latency in terms of time spent to generate the first token of the response for

Reviewer 2: should it be reported if token is never generated? I.e. should the metric have `error.type` attribute or it only captures successful generations?
similar question for `time_per_output_token`

Author: Both of these are cumulative and report only on successful token generations.

any model servers which support serving LLMs.

For example, if a model server which serves LLMs reports latency information,
it SHOULD be used.

If instrumentation cannot obtain this information at a request level and break

> it down into the buckets mentioned below, then it MUST NOT report this metric.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this formula on each metric?

I believe it's implied for Recommended metric level - instrumentations SHOULD report it if they can and if they report it they MUST/SHOULD follow the semantics. 

So maybe just omit it for brevity?

Author: Makes sense. Included it following the other metric which had it. I've dropped it now from all the metrics.

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.gen_ai.server.request_duration(full) -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`gen_ai.operation.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/gen-ai.md) | string | The name of the operation being performed. | `chat`; `completion` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`gen_ai.request.model`](/docs/attributes-registry/gen-ai.md) | string | The name of the LLM a request is being made to. | `gpt-4` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`gen_ai.system`](/docs/attributes-registry/gen-ai.md) | string | The Generative AI product as identified by the client instrumentation. [1] | `openai` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer: Should we remove the client reference from this Description? Or change to "client or server instrumentation"?

Author: Changed to include server as well.

**[2]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.port` SHOULD represent the server port behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

**[3]:** When observed from the client side, and when communicating through an intermediary, `server.address` SHOULD represent the server address behind any intermediaries, for example proxies, if it's available.

`gen_ai.system` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used; otherwise, a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description | Stability |
|---|---|---|
| `openai` | OpenAI | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `gen_ai.server.time_per_output_token`

This metric is [recommended][MetricRecommended] to report the model server

> latency in terms of time per token generated for any model servers which

Reviewer: Maybe a dumb question, but is this intended be an average of the time between all tokens? So essentially the (request_duration) / (output tokens) for a each request?

Author: Added more information in the description. TPOT per request = (request duration - TTFT) / (output tokens - 1). It is then aggregated into buckets.
